How the Moon Got Its Name
Our Moon shares a name with all moons simply because people didn't know other moons existed until Galileo Galilei discovered four moons orbiting Jupiter in 1610. In Latin, the Moon was called Luna, which is the main adjective for all things Moon-related: lunar.
Potential for Life
The many missions that have explored the Moon have found no evidence to suggest it has its own living things. However, the Moon could be the site of future colonization by humans. The discovery that the Moon harbors water ice, and that the highest concentrations occur within darkened craters at the poles, makes the Moon a little more hospitable for future human colonists.
Size and Distance
With a radius of about 1,080 miles (1,740 kilometers), the Moon is less than a third of the width of Earth. If Earth were the size of a nickel, the Moon would be about as big as a coffee bean.
The Moon is an average of 238,855 miles (384,400 kilometers) away. That means 30 Earth-sized planets could fit in between Earth and the Moon.
The Moon is slowly moving away from Earth, getting about an inch farther away each year.
 
NASA/Moore Boeck
Orbit and Rotation
The Moon is rotating at the same rate that it revolves around Earth (called synchronous rotation), so the same hemisphere faces Earth all the time. Some people call the far side – the hemisphere we never see from Earth – the "dark side", but that's misleading. 
As the Moon orbits Earth, different parts are in sunlight or darkness at different times. The changing illumination is why, from our perspective, the Moon goes through phases. During a "full moon," the hemisphere of the Moon we can see from Earth is fully illuminated by the Sun. And a "new moon" occurs when the far side of the Moon has full sunlight, and the side facing us is having its night.
The Moon makes a complete orbit around Earth in 27 Earth days and rotates or spins at that same rate, or in that same amount of time. Because Earth is moving as well – rotating on its axis as it orbits the Sun – from our perspective, the Moon appears to orbit us every 29 days.
Rings
The Moon has no rings.
Moons
Earth's Moon has no moons of its own.
Formation
The Moon likely formed after a Mars-sized body collided with Earth several billion years ago.
The resulting debris from both Earth and the impactor accumulated to form our natural satellite 239,000 miles (384,000 kilometers) away. The newly formed Moon was in a molten state, but within about 100 million years, most of the global "magma ocean" had crystallized, with less-dense rocks floating upward and eventually forming the lunar crust.
Structure
Earth's Moon has a core, mantle, and crust.
The Moon’s core is proportionally smaller than other terrestrial bodies' cores. The solid, iron-rich inner core is 149 miles (240 kilometers) in radius. It is surrounded by a liquid iron shell 56 miles (90 kilometers) thick. A partially molten layer surrounds the iron core.
The mantle extends from the top of the partially molten layer to the bottom of the Moon's crust. It is most likely made of minerals like olivine and pyroxene, which are made up of magnesium, iron, silicon, and oxygen atoms.
The crust is about 25 miles (40 kilometers) thick on the Moon’s near-side hemisphere and up to about 37 miles (60 kilometers) thick on the far-side. It is made of oxygen, silicon, magnesium, iron, calcium, and aluminum, with small amounts of titanium, uranium, thorium, potassium, and hydrogen.
Long ago the Moon had active volcanoes, but today they are all dormant and have not erupted for millions of years.
Surface
With too sparse an atmosphere to impede impacts, a steady rain of asteroids, meteoroids, and comets strikes the surface of the Moon, leaving numerous craters behind. Tycho Crater is more than 52 miles (85 kilometers) wide.
Over billions of years, these impacts have ground up the surface of the Moon into fragments ranging from huge boulders to powder. Nearly the entire Moon is covered by a rubble pile of charcoal-gray, powdery dust, and rocky debris called the lunar regolith. Beneath is a region of fractured bedrock referred to as the megaregolith.
The light areas of the Moon are known as the highlands. The dark features, called maria (Latin for seas), are impact basins that were filled with lava between 4.2 and 1.2 billion years ago. These light and dark areas represent rocks of different compositions and ages, which provide evidence for how the early crust may have crystallized from a lunar magma ocean. The craters themselves, which have been preserved for billions of years, provide an impact history for the Moon and other bodies in the inner solar system.
If you looked in the right places on the Moon, you would find pieces of equipment, American flags, and even a camera left behind by astronauts. While you were there, you'd notice that the gravity on the surface of the Moon is one-sixth of Earth's, which is why in footage of moonwalks, astronauts appear to almost bounce across the surface.
The temperature on the Moon reaches about 260 degrees Fahrenheit (127 degrees Celsius) when in full Sun, but in darkness, the temperatures plummet to about -280 degrees Fahrenheit (-173 degrees Celsius).
Water on the Moon
During the initial exploration of the Moon, and the analysis of all the returned samples from the Apollo and the Luna missions, we thought that the surface of the Moon was dry.
The first definitive discovery of water was made in 2008 by the Indian mission Chandrayaan-1, which detected hydroxyl molecules spread across the lunar surface and concentrated at the poles. Missions such as Lunar Prospector, LCROSS, and Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter, have not only shown that the surface of the Moon has global hydration but there are actually high concentrations of ice water in the permanently shadowed regions of the lunar poles.
Scientists have discovered that water is being released from the Moon during meteor showers.
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center
Scientists also found the lunar surface releases its water when the Moon is bombarded by micrometeoroids. The surface is protected by a layer, a few centimeters of dry soil that can only be breached by large micrometeoroids. When micrometeoroids impact the surface of the Moon, most of the material in the crater is vaporized. The shock wave carries enough energy to release the water that’s coating the grains of the soil. Most of that water is released into space.
In October 2020, NASA’s Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy (SOFIA) confirmed, for the first time, water on the sunlit surface of the Moon. This discovery indicates that water may be distributed across the lunar surface, and not limited to cold, shadowed places. SOFIA detected water molecules (H2O) in Clavius Crater, one of the largest craters visible from Earth, located in the Moon’s southern hemisphere.
> Discovery Timeline: Water & Ices on the Moon
Atmosphere
The Moon has a very thin and weak atmosphere. It does not provide any protection from the Sun's radiation or impacts from meteoroids.
Magnetosphere
The early Moon may have developed an internal dynamo, the mechanism for generating global magnetic fields for terrestrial planets, but today, the Moon has a very weak magnetic field. The magnetic field here on Earth is many thousands of times stronger than the Moon's magnetic field.
Moon Phases
In our entire solar system, the only object that shines with its own light is the Sun. That light always beams onto Earth and Moon from the direction of the Sun, illuminating half of our planet in its orbit and reflecting off the surface of the Moon to create moonlight. Sometimes the entire face of the Moon glows brightly. Other times we see only a thin crescent of light. Sometimes the Moon seems to disappear. These shifts are called Moon phases.

The eight lunar phases are, in order: new Moon, waxing crescent, first quarter, waxing gibbous, full Moon, waning gibbous, third quarter, and waning crescent. The cycle repeats about once a month (every 29.5 days).

Like Earth, the Moon has a day side and a night side, which change as the Moon rotates. The Sun always illuminates half of the Moon while the other half remains dark, but how much we are able to see of that illuminated half changes as the Moon travels through its orbit.
All Moon Phases
Let’s take a look at the individual phases, and how the movements of the Moon and Sun appear to us as we watch from the Northern Hemisphere on Earth:

New Moon

This is the invisible phase of the Moon, with the illuminated side of the Moon facing the Sun and the night side facing Earth. In this phase, the Moon is in the same part of the sky as the Sun and rises and sets with the Sun. Not only is the illuminated side facing away from the Earth, it’s also up during the day! Remember, in this phase, the Moon doesn’t usually pass directly between Earth and the Sun, due to the inclination of the Moon’s orbit. It only passes near the Sun from our perspective on Earth.
Waxing Crescent

This silver sliver of a Moon occurs when the illuminated half of the Moon faces mostly away from Earth, with only a tiny portion visible to us from our planet. It grows daily as the Moon’s orbit carries the Moon’s dayside farther into view. Every day, the Moon rises a little bit later.
First Quarter

The Moon is now a quarter of the way through its monthly journey and you see half of its illuminated side. People may casually call this a half Moon, but remember, that’s not really what you’re witnessing in the sky. You’re seeing just a slice of the entire Moon ― half of the illuminated half. A first quarter Moon rises around noon and sets around midnight. It’s high in the sky in the evening and makes for excellent viewing.
Waxing Gibbous

Now most of the Moon’s dayside has come into view, and the Moon appears brighter in the sky.
Full Moon

This is as close as we come to seeing the Sun’s illumination of the entire day side of the Moon (so, technically, this would be the real half moon). The Moon is opposite the Sun, as viewed from Earth, revealing the Moon’s dayside. A full Moon rises around sunset and sets around sunrise. The Moon will appear full for a couple of days before it moves into…
Waning Gibbous

As the Moon begins its journey back toward the Sun, the opposite side of the Moon now reflects the Moon’s light. The lighted side appears to shrink, but the Moon’s orbit is simply carrying it out of view from our perspective. The Moon rises later and later each night.Last Quarter

The Moon looks like it’s half illuminated from the perspective of Earth, but really you’re seeing half of the half of the Moon that’s illuminated by the Sun ― or a quarter. A last quarter Moon, also known as a third quarter Moon, rises around midnight and sets around noon.
Waning Crescent

The Moon is nearly back to the point in its orbit where its dayside directly faces the Sun, and all that we see from our perspective is a thin curve.
Our Wobbly Moon
When we think of the way the Moon seems to change over the course of a month, we think of phases. But frequent Moon observers know that the Moon also appears to twist, nod, and roll slightly during its journey across the sky, allowing us to peek around the Moon's shoulder and catch glimpses of the farside. This phenomenon is called libration.Because the Moon's orbit is not perfectly circular, its distance from Earth and its speed in orbit both change slightly throughout the month. The Moon’s rate of rotation around its own axis, though, always stays the same.

When the Moon is at its closest to Earth and moving most quickly along its orbital path, the Moon itself doesn’t rotate quite fast enough to keep entirely the same side facing us, and we get to see a little more of the eastern side of the Moon. When the Moon is farthest from Earth and orbiting at its slowest, its rotation gets a little ahead, and we see a bit more of its western side. We call this motion “libration in longitude.”

The 5 degree tilt of the Moon’s orbit also causes it to appear to nod, as though it were saying “yes.” The tilt sometimes brings the Moon above Earth’s northern hemisphere, and sometimes below Earth’s southern hemisphere, allowing us to see slightly more of the northern or southern hemispheres of the Moon. We call this motion “libration in latitude.”

Finally, the Moon appears to tilt back and forth like a metronome. The tilt of the Moon’s orbit contributes to this, but it’s mostly due to the tilt of our Earth. Earth has a tilt of 23.5 degrees on its axis, which means that when we observe the Moon from Earth, it’s a little like we’re standing sideways on a ramp. If you look left, the ramp slopes up. If you look right, the ramp slopes down. In front of you, the horizon looks higher on the right and lower on the left. If you turn around, the horizon appears to tilt the opposite way.

The tilted ramp works the same way as the tilted “platform” of the Earth beneath our feet. Every two weeks, we have to look in the opposite direction to see the Moon, and the ground beneath our feet is then tilted the opposite way as well.

Earthshine

Sometimes, when the Moon is in one of its crescent phases, we can still see the darkened area of the Moon’s nearside shining dimly. This effect is caused by the Sun’s light reflecting off Earth’s surface onto the face of the Moon. Because Earth at that point in its orbit is nearly full from the Moon’s perspective, the light it reflects, called earthshine, is bright enough to dimly illuminate the darkened surface.

Daytime Moons

Though the Moon is often thought of as a nighttime visitor, it’s also visible during the day as a faint, pale presence. The best times to see a daytime Moon are perhaps during the first and last quarter phases, when the Moon is high enough above the horizon and at about 90 degrees from the Sun in the sky. This helps make the Sun’s reflected light bright enough to see as it reflects off of the Moon. The Moon can be seen in the daylit sky at any phase except for the new Moon, when it’s invisible to us, and full Moon, when it’s below the horizon during the day. The crescent through quarter phases are high in the sky during the day, but the daytime gibbous phases can be glimpsed only just before the Sun sets.
Overview From Space
Imagine you’re in a spaceship, traveling away from Earth. As you sail onward, you see our planet and its Moon locked together in their endless, circling, gravitational embrace. Your distant view gives you a unique perspective on the Moon that can be hard to visualize from the ground, where the Moon appears to sweep through the sky as an ever-changing globe of light.From your astronaut’s viewpoint, you can see that the Moon is an average of 238,855 miles (384,399 km) from Earth, or about the space that could be occupied by 30 Earths. It travels around our planet once every 27.322 days in an elliptical orbit, an elongated circle. (It takes about 27.3 days to complete a revolution, but 29.5 days to change from new moon to new moon.) The Moon is tidally locked with Earth, which means that it spins on its axis exactly once each time it orbits our planet. Because of this, people on Earth only ever see one side of the Moon. We call this motion synchronous rotation.
Moonlight
What is Moonlight?
The Moon does not make its own light. "Moonlight” is actually reflected sunlight. At any moment, half of the Moon is brightly sunlit (this is the day side). The other half is in the dark (this is the night side). Throughout the month, as the Moon rotates and orbits, day and night occur on different parts of its surface, just like on Earth. Unlike our planet, though, the Moon takes a whole month to complete one rotation. This means that lunar day and night are each about two Earth weeks long.

The View From Home
We always see the same face of the Moon from Earth—the “lunar nearside.” Each month, as day and night sweep across the lunar nearside, the sunlit part of our view takes on a series of familiar shapes: crescent, half-moon, full, and more. Moon phases are really just the overlap between lunar daylight and the Moon’s Earth-facing side.

What Color is the Moon?
From here on Earth, the sunlit part of the Moon usually looks bright, almost white. This is an illusion. The brightness of the Sun’s reflected light makes it difficult to see the Moon’s actual color from a distance. A closer look reveals that much of the Moon’s scenery comes in shades of dark gray, like rocks found near volcanoes on our own world. The Moon has volcanic rock from ancient lava flows ― and these dark-colored materials absorb most of the visible light that reaches them.Overall, only about one-tenth of the sunlight that hits the Moon is reflected back into space. This ratio of reflected light is called albedo. For comparison, our watery planet bounces about three-tenths of incoming rays back into space. Venus has an even higher albedo than Earth, reflecting well over half of the sunlight that reaches it.

So, how does the dark, volcanic Moon outshine Venus in our sky? It all comes down to distance. The Moon orbits Earth at an average distance of about 239,000 miles (385,000 kilometers). That’s a long way by human standards, but almost nothing compared to the tens of millions of miles that separate Earth and Venus. Thanks to this relative closeness, a full moon directs enough sunlight towards our planet to cast sharp shadows on the ground. The Moon’s albedo may be tiny, but even a small amount of reflected sunshine is enough to make the Moon seem brilliant from our perspective on Earth.

The “Man in the Moon” and Other Stories
If you’ve ever found a face, an animal, or another image in the Moon’s patterns of darker and lighter gray, you have compared albedos for yourself! The Moon’s ancient, hardened volcanic seas are made of basalt. These areas reflect less light (have lower albedo). The lunar highlands look brighter because they contain more reflective (or higher-albedo) rocks, like anorthosite.

Next time you observe the Moon, you’ll know: those darker-gray patches are really vast oceans of cooled lava.

LRO: A Closer Look
Telescopes and robotic explorers let us look even more carefully at the Moon’s albedo patterns. Images captured by NASA’s Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) show small variations in great detail. Scientists use albedo data and other evidence to figure out what the lunar landscape is made of.
Water & Ices on the Moon
What’s big, covered in water, yet 100 times drier than the Sahara Desert? It’s not a riddle, it’s the Moon! For centuries, astronomers debated whether water exists on Earth’s closest neighbor. In 2020, data from NASA’s SOFIA mission confirmed water exists in the sunlit area of the lunar surface as molecules of H2O embedded within, or perhaps sticking to the surface of, grains of lunar dust. Here is a brief history of the discoveries leading up to the confirmation of water on the Moon.

Maria on the Moon (1645)
When early astronomers looked up at the Moon, they were struck by the large, dark spots on its surface. In 1645, Dutch astronomer Michael van Langren published the first-known map of the Moon referring to the dark spots as “maria” – the Latin word for “seas” – and putting into writing the widely-held view that the marks were oceans on the lunar surface. Similar maps from Johannes Hevelius (1647), Giovanni Riccioli and Francesco Grimaldi (1651) were published over the next few years. We now know these spots to be plains of basalt created by early volcanic eruptions, but the nomenclature of ‘maria’ (plural) or ‘mare’ (singular) remains.
Totally Dry Moon (1892)
American astronomer William Pickering made measurements in the late 1800s that led him to conclude the Moon essentially has no atmosphere. With no clouds and no atmosphere, scientists generally agreed that any water on the lunar surface would evaporate immediately. Pickering’s measurements led to a widespread view that the Moon was devoid of water.
Ideas of Water (1960s)
As scientists made headway in understanding the behavior of substances that are prone to vaporize at relatively low temperatures – called volatiles – theoretical physicist Kenneth Watson published a paper in 1961 describing how a substance like water could exist on the Moon. Watson’s paper first popularized the idea that water ice could stick to the bottom of craters on the Moon that never receive light from the Sun, while sunlit areas on the Moon would be so hot that water would evaporate near-instantly. These lightless areas of the Moon are called “permanently shadowed regions.”

Apollo Landings (1969 – 1972)
The Apollo era brought humans to the lunar surface for the very first time, giving researchers the opportunity to directly look for signs of water on the Moon. When tested, soil samples brought back by Apollo astronauts revealed no sign of water. Scientists concluded that the lunar surface must be completely dry, and the prospect of water wasn’t seriously considered again for decades.
Possible Frozen Water in Shadowed Craters (1994, 1998)
NASA’s Clementine mission launched in 1994 to orbit the Moon for two months and collect information about its minerals. Clementine data suggested there was ice in a permanently shadowed region of the Moon. The Lunar Prospector Mission focused on permanently shadowed craters to look deeper into the discovery and in 1998 found that the largest concentrations of hydrogen exist in the areas of the lunar surface that are never exposed to sunlight. The results indicated water ice at the lunar poles. However, the images were low resolution so no strong conclusions could be made.
Revisiting Apollo Samples (2008)
Capitalizing on major advances in technology since the Apollo era, researchers from Brown University revisited the Apollo samples. They found hydrogen inside tiny beads of volcanic glass. Since no volcanoes are erupting on the Moon today, the discovery presented evidence that water had existed in the Moon when the volcanoes erupted in the Moon’s ancient past. Additionally, the preserved hydrogen provided clues to the origins of lunar water: if it emerged from erupting volcanoes, it must have come from within the Moon. The discovery suggested that water was a part of the Moon since its early existence – and perhaps since it first formed.
Signs of Hydration (2009)
Chandrayaan, Cassini, Deep Impact

A suite of spacecraft enabled exciting discoveries in 2009. None were designed to look for water on the Moon, yet the Indian Space Research Organization’s Chandrayaan-1 and NASA’s Cassini and Deep Impact missions detected signs of hydrated minerals in the form of oxygen and hydrogen molecules in sunlit areas of the Moon. Researchers couldn’t determine whether they were seeing hydration by hydroxyl (OH) or water (H2O). They also debated whether the amount of hydration depended on the time of day.
Observations of Lunar Debris Reveal More (2009 – 2019)
The Lunar Crater Observation and Sensing Satellite (LCROSS) spacecraft and Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) launched together in 2009. Later that year, LCROSS intentionally discharged a projectile into a crater believed to contain water ice, and flew through the debris from the projectile’s impact. Four minutes later, LCROSS itself intentionally impacted the Moon while LRO observed. The combined observations showed grains of water ice in the ejected material. The LRO and LCROSS findings added to a growing body of evidence that water exists on the Moon in the form of ice within permanently shadowed regions. LRO continues to orbit the Moon and provide data used to characterize and map lunar resources, including hydrogen.
Confirmation of Moon Water – Shadowed Regions (2018)
Data from Moon Mineralogy Mapper (M3), carried by ISRO's Chandrayaan-1, provided scientists with the first high-resolution map of the minerals that make up the lunar surface. The NASA instrument flew aboard India’s Chandrayaan-1 mission in 2009. An analysis of the full set of data from M3, announced in 2018, revealed multiple confirmed locations of water ice in permanently shadowed regions of the Moon.
Confirmation of Moon Water – Sunlit Surface (2020)
In 2020, NASA announced the discovery of water on the sunlit surface of the Moon. Data from the Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy (SOFIA), revealed that in Clavius crater, water exists in concentrations roughly equivalent to a 12-ounce bottle of water within a cubic meter of soil across the lunar surface. The discovery showed that water could be distributed across the lunar surface, even on sunlit portions, and not confined to cold, dark areas.
First Detailed, Wide-Area Map of Water on the Moon (2023)
In 2023, a new map of water distribution on the Moon provided hints about how water may be moving across the Moon’s surface. The map, made using SOFIA data, extends to the Moon’s South Pole – the intended region of study for NASA’s Artemis missions, and the water-hunting rover, VIPER.
More to Discover
Researchers have confirmed that water exists both in the sunlit and shadowed surfaces of the Moon, yet many questions remain. Lunar scientists continue to investigate the origins of water and its behavior. There is evidence that the water on the Moon comes from ancient and current comet impacts, icy micrometeorites colliding on the lunar surface, and lunar dust interactions with the solar wind. However, more research is needed to understand the full history, present, and future of water on the Moon.
Lunar Prospector
Mission Name: Lunar Prospector Nation: United States of America (USA) Objectives: Lunar Orbit and Impact Mission Design and Management: NASA / ARC (Ames Research Center) Spacecraft Mass: 660 pounds (300 kilograms) Launch Vehicle: Athena-2 (LM-004) Launch Date and Time: Jan. 7, 1998 / 02:28:44 UT Launch Site: Cape Canaveral Air Force Station / SLC-46
 The Lunar Prospector spacecraft was equipped with five primary scientific instruments to study the Moon:

Electron Reflectometer and Magnetometer (MAG/ER)

Gamma-Ray Spectrometer (GRS)

Neutron Spectrometer (NS)

Alpha Particle Spectrometer (APS)

Doppler Gravity Experiment (DGE) - utilized the S-band antenna for measurements.
An artist's concept depicts the Lunar Prospector spacecraft moments before its planned impact on the Moon. The mission, managed by NASA Ames, focused on mapping the Moon's surface composition, polar ice deposits, and magnetic/gravity fields.
Key Dates
Jan. 8, 1998: Launch

Jan. 12, 1998: Entered Lunar Orbit

July 31, 1999: Lunar Impact

In Depth: Lunar Prospector
Lunar Prospector was designed to collect data to compile the first complete compositional and gravity maps of the Moon during its planned one year mission in lunar polar orbit. It was the third mission of NASA’s Discovery Program of low cost, highly focused, and relatively frequent missions that were competitively selected.

After two course corrections, Lunar Prospector entered orbit around the Moon 105 hours after launch. Initial parameters were 57 x 95 miles (92 × 153 kilometers). After two additional corrections Jan. 13 and Jan. 15, the spacecraft entered its operational 62 x 62-mile (100 × 100-kilometer) orbit at 90 degrees inclination with a period of 118 minutes.

Scientists were most interested in continuing the investigations into the signs of water ice on the Moon found by the Clementine probe.

In March 1998, NASA announced that data from Lunar Prospector suggested the presence of water ice at both the lunar poles. The neutron spectrometer instrument detected hydrogen, assumed to be in the form of water. The information indicated that a large amount of water ice, possibly about 330 million short tons (300 million metric tons), was mixed into the regolith at each pole, the first direct evidence of water ice at the lunar poles.

The spacecraft also detected strong localized magnetic fields, mapped the global distribution of major rock types, and discovered signs of a 370-mile (600-kilometer) diameter, iron-rich core.

On Dec. 10, 1998, Lunar Prospector’s orbit was lowered to 25 miles (40 kilometers) to perform high-resolution studies. A subsequent maneuver Jan. 28, 1999, changed the orbit to about 9 x 28 miles (15 × 45 kilometers) and ended the space probe’s primary mission, but began an extended mission for an additional seven months.

Lunar Prospector was deliberately impacted onto the shadowed Shoemaker crater on the lunar surface at 09:52:02 UT July 31, 1999. Observations of the resulting dust cloud by Earth-based telescopes showed no spectral signature characteristic of water vapor.

The vehicle carried part of the cremated remains of geologist Eugene Shoemaker to the lunar surface.

